MATH.-STAT.
SIM ISAAC MIBWf OM«
NEWTON'S PRINCIPIA.
THE
MATHEMATICAL PRINCIPLES
OF
NATURAL PHILOSOPHY,
BY SIR ISAAC NEWTON;
TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH BY ANDREW MOTTE.
TO WHICH IS ADDKTV
NEWTON'S SYSTEM OF THE WORLD ;
With a P ortrait taken from the Bust in t he Royal O bservatory at G reenwich.
FIRST AMERICAN EDITION, CAREFULLY REVISED AND CORRECTED,
WITH A LIFE OF THE AUTHOR, BY PI. W. CHITTENDEN, M. A., &e.
NEW-YORK
PUBLISHED BY DANIEL ADEE, 45 LIBERTY STREET.
Kntered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1846, by
DANIEL ADEE.
3!Ltht Clerk's Office ut'tiie Southern Oisli:ct Court of New-York.
-
*
p
TWuey * Lockwoof, Stom
16 Spruce St. N. Y.



236 THE MATHEMATICAL PRINCIPLES [BOOK 1.
contents u.ider A X AZ, and B X BZ. Join AB, and let it be cut in G,
so that AG may be to BG as the particle B to the particle A : and G
will be the common centre of gravity of the particles A and B. The force
A X AZ will (by Cor. 2, of the Laws) be resolved into the forces A X GZ
and A X AG ; and the force B X BZ into the forces B X GZ and B X
BG. Now the forces A X AG and B X BG, because A is proportional to
B, and BG to AG, are equal, and therefore having contrary directions de
stroy one another. There remain then the forces A X GZ and B X GZ.
These tend from Z towards the centre G, and compose the force A + B
X GZ ; t hat is, t he same force as if the attractive particles A and B were
placed in their common centre of gravity G, composing there a little globe.
By the same reasoning, if there be added a third particle G, and the
force of it be compounded with the force A -f B X GZ tending to the cen
tre G, the force thence arising will tend to the common centre of gravity
of that globe in G and of the particle C ; that is, to the common centre oi
gravity of the three particles A, B, C ; and will be the same as if that
globe and the particle C were placed in that common centre composing a
greater globe there ; and so we may go on in injinitum. Therefore
the whole force of all the particles of any body whatever RSTV is the
same as if that body, without removing its centre of gravity, were to put
on the form of a globe. Q,.E.D.
COR. Hence the motion of the attracted body Z will be the same as if
the attracting body RSTV were sphaerical ; and therefore if that attract
ing body be either at rest, or proceed uniformly in a right line, the body
attracted will move in an ellipsis having its centre in the centre of gravity
of the attracting body.
PROPOSITION LXXXIX. THEOREM XLVI.
If there be several bodies consisting of equal particles whose jorces are
as the distances of the places from each, the force compounded of all
the forces by which any corpuscle is attracted will tend to the common
centre of gravity of the attracting bodies ; and will be the same as if
those attracting bodies, preserving their common centre of gravity,
should unite there, and be formed into a globe.
This is demonstrated after the same manner as the foregoing Proposi
tion.
COR. Therefore the motion of the attracted body will be the same as if
the attracting bodies, preserving their common centre of gravity, should
unite there, and be formed into a globe. And, therefore, if the common
centre of gravity of the attracting bodies be either at rest, or proceed uni
formly in a right line, the attracted body will move in an ellipsis having
Us centre in the common centre of gravity of the attracting bodies.
OOK I.


SEC. X.I OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 185
s
H
mean time the curvilinear path AP. Let AP be the whole curvilinear
path described since the wheel touched the globe in A, and the length cf
this path AP will be to twice the versed sine of the arc |PB as 20 E to
CB. For let the right line CE (produced if need be) meet the wheel in V,
and join CP, BP, EP, VP ; produce CP, and let fall thereon the perpen
dicular VF. Let PH, VH, meeting in H, touch the circle in P and V,
and let PH cut YF in G, and to VP let fall the perpendiculars GI, HK.
From the centre C with any interval let there be described the circle wow,
cutting the right line CP in nt the perimeter of the wheel BP in o, and
the curvilinear path AP in m ; and from the centre V with the interval
Vo let there be described a circle cutting VP produced in q.
Because the wheel in its progress always revolves about the point of con
tact B. it is manifest that the right line BP is perpendicular to that curve line
AP which the point P of the wheel describes, and therefore that the right
line VP will touch this curve in the point P. Let the radius of the circle nmn
be gradually increased or diminished so that at last it become equal to the
distance CP ; and by reason of the similitude of the evanescent figure
Pnn-mq, and the figure PFGVI, the ultimate ratio of the evanescent lined ae
Pra, P//, Po, P<y, that is, the ratio of the momentary mutations of the curve
AP, the right line CP, the circular arc BP, and the right line VP, will ••<



1.72 THE MATHEMATICAL PRINCIPLES [BOOK 1.
is at first urged in I, a s DR to DF. Let the body go on towards k; and
about the centre C, with the interval Ck, describe the circle ke, meeting
the right line PD in e, and let there be erected the lines eg, ev, ew, ordi-
nately applied to the curves BF§*, abv} acw. From the given rectangle
PDRQ, and the given law of centripetal force, by which the first body is
acted on, the curve line BF»* is also given, by the construction of Prop.
XXVII, and its Cor. 1. Then from the given angle CIK is given the
proportion of the nascent lines 1K; KN ; and thence, by the construction
of Prob. XXVIII, there is given the quantity Q,, with the curve lines abv,
acw ; and therefore, at the end of any time Dbve, there is given both
the altitude of the body Ce or Ck, and the area Dcwe, with the sector
equal to it XCy, the angle 1C A:, a nd the place k} in which the body will
then be found. Q.E.I.
We suppose in these Propositions the centripetal force to vary in its
recess from the centre according to some law, which any one may imagine
at pleasure; but at equal distances from the centre to be everywhere the
Bame.
I have hitherto considered the motions of bodies in immovable orbits.
It remains now to add something concerning their motions in orbits which
revolve round the centres of force.
SECTION IX.
Of the motion of bodies in moveable orbits ; and of the motion of the
apsides.
PROPOSITION XLIII. PROBLEM XXX.
Ft is required to make a body move in a trajectory that revolves about
the centre of f orce in the same manner as another body in the same
trajectory at rest.
In. the orbit VPK, given by position, let the body
P revolve, proceeding from V towards K. From
the centre C let there be continually drawn Cp, equal
to CP, making the angle VC/? proportional to the
angle VCP ; and the area which the line Cp describes
will be to the area VCP, which the line CP describes
at the same time, ns the velocity of the describing
line Cp to the velocity of the describing line CP ;
that is, as the angle VC/? to the angle VCP, therefore in a given ratio,
and therefore proportional to the time. Since, then, the area described by
the line Cp in an immovable plane is proportional to the time, it is manifest
that a body, being acted upon by a just quantity of centripetal force may




BOOK II


284
THE MATHEMATICAL PRINCIPLES [BOOK II
2APQ, + 2B A X PU
II of this Book) the moment KL of AK will be equal to
2BPQ
or
Z -, a nd the moment KLON of the area A£NK will be equal to
2BPQ X LO BPQ, X BD3
~~Z~~ >r 2 Z X OK x~AB"
CASE 1. Now if the body ascends, and the gravity be as AB2 + BD9
BET being a circle, the line AC, which is proportional to the gravity
AW2 i RF)2
will be - ~ -- , a nd DP2 or AP2 + 2BAP + AB2 + BD2 will be
AK XZ + AC X Z or CK X Z : and therefore the area DTV will be to
the area DPQ, as DT2 or I)B2 to CK X Z.
CASE 2. If theA rb>2o d _y aHsIc)e2n ds, and the gravity be as AB2 — BD2, the
line AC will be "- - Z^ - -- , a nd DT2 will be to DP2 as DF2 or DB2
to BP2— BD2 or AP2 + 2BAP + AB2 H — BD2, that is, t o AK X Z +
AC X Z or CK X Z. And therefore the area DTV will be to the area
DPQ as DB2 to CK X Z.
CASE 3. And by the same reasoning, if the body descends, and therefore
the gravity is as BD2 — AB2, and the line AC becomes equal to
or)2 AB2
Z5 T— r ; t he area DTV will be to the area DPQ as DB2 to CK X
Z : as above.
Since, therefore, these areas are always in this ratio, if for the area







BOOK 111.] OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 401
longitude of the comet at the time of the last observation. The angle,
therefore, FQG, which is the difference of the longitude, proceeds from the
inequality of the motions of the comet and the earth ; and this angle, if
the earth and cornet move contrary ways, is added to the angle TQ,G, and
accelerates the apparent motion of the comet ; b ut if the comet move the
same way with the earth, it is subtracted, and either retards the motion ol
the comet, or perhaps renders it retrograde, as we have but now explained.
This angle, therefore, proceeding chiefly from the motion of the earth, is
justly to be esteemed the parallax of the comet; neglecting, to wit, some
little increment or decrement that may arise from the unequal motion of
the comet in its orbit : and from this parallax we thus deduce the distance
of the comet. Let S represent the sun, acT v
the orbis tnagnus, a the earth's place in the
first observatiun, c the place of the earth in
the third observation, T the place of the
earth in the last observation, and TT a right
line drawn to the beginning of Aries. Set
off the angle TTV equal to the angle TQF,
that is, e qual to the longitude of the comet
at the time when the earth is in T ; j oin ac,
and produce it to g1, so as ag may be to ac
as AG to AC ; and g will be the place at
which the earth would have arrived in the
time of the last observation, if it had con
tinued to move uniformly in the right line
ac. Wherefore, if we draw g'T parallel to TT, and make the angle T^V
equal to the angle TQ,G, this angle Tg\ will be equal to the longitude of
the comet seen from the place g, and the angle TVg- will be the parallax
which arises from the earth's being transferred from the place g into the
place T ; and therefore V will be the place of the comet in the plane of the
ecliptic. And this place V is commonly lower than the orb of Jupiter.
The same thing may be deduced from the incurvation of the way of the
comets ; f or these bodies move almost in great circles, while their velocity
is great ; b ut about the end of their course, when that part of their appa
rent motion which arises from the parallax bears a greater proportion to
their whole apparent motion, they commonly deviate from those circles, and
when the earth goes to one side, they deviate to the other : and this deflex
ion, because of its corresponding with the motion of the earth, must arise
chiefly from the parallax ; and the quantity thereof is so considerable, as,
by my computation, to place the disappearing comets a good deal lower
than Jupiter. Whence it follows that when they approach nearer to us in
their perigees and perihelions they often descend below the orbs of Mare
and the inferior planets.
130
THE MATHEMATICAL PRINCIPLES
[BOOK 1IJ
If, therefore, the nodes went on with that velocity uniformly continued
which they acquire in the moon's syzygies, they would describe a space
double of that which they describe in fact ; and, therefore, the mean motion,
by which, if Uniformly continued, they would describe the same space with
that which they do in fact describe by an unequal motion, is but one-half
of that motion which they are possessed of in the moon's syzygies. Where
fore since their greatest horary motion, if the nodes are in the quadratures,
is 33" 10'" 33iv. 12V. their mean horary motion in this case will be 16"
35'" 16iv. 36V. And seeing the horary motion of the nodes is every where
as AZ2 and the area PDdM conjunctly, and. therefore, in the moon's
syzygies, the horary motion of the nodes is as AZ2 and the area PDdM
conjunctly, that is (because the area PDdNL described in the syzygies is
given), as AZ2, therefore the mean motion also will be as AZ2 ; a nd, there
fore, when the nodes are without the quadratures, this motion will be to
16" 35'" I6'v. 36V. as AZ2 to AT2. Q.E.D.
PROPOSITION XXXI. PROBLEM XII.
To find the horary motion of the nodes of the moon in an elliptic orbit
Let Qjpmaq represent an ellipsis described with the greater axis Qy, am
the lesser axis ab : QA^B a circle circumscribed ; T the earth in the com
mon centre of both ; S the sun ; p the moon moving in this ellipsis ; and

71
Bnme an hour, since the angle GTg* (by Prop. XXX) is to the angle 33'
10'" 33iv. as IT X PG X AZ to AT3, the angle GP^ (or the horary va
riation of the inclination) will be to the angle 33" 10'" 33iv. as IT X AZ
X TG X to AT3. Q.E.I.
And thus it would be if the moon was uniformly revolved in a circular
orbit. But if the orbit is elliptical, the mean motion of the nodes will
be diminished in proportion of the lesser axis to the greater, as we have
shewn above ; and the variation of the inclination will be also diminished
in the same proportion.
COR. 1. Upon N/i erect the perpendicular TF, and let pM. be the horary
motion of the moon in the plane of the ecliptic; upon Q.T let fall the
perpendiculars pK, MA*, and produce them till they meet TF in H and h ;
then IT will be to AT as Kk to Mjt? ; and TG to Up as TZ to AT ; and,
KA* X H# x T7
therefore, IT X TG will be equal to -= — , t hat is, equal to
T7
the area HpWi multiplied into the ratio ^ : and therefore the horary
variation of the inclination will be to 33" 10"' 33iv. as the area HpMA
TZ P»
multiplied into AZ X ,T~ X ^ to AT3.
MJD PG
COR. 2. And, therefore, if the earth and nodes were after every hour
drawn back from their new and instantly restored to their old places, so as
their situation might continue given for a whole periodic month together,
the whole variation of the inclination durinor that month would be to 33'


3,K)K HI.] OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.
475
*2
Mr. Pound has since observed a second time the positions of thcst fixed
stars amongst themselves, and collected their longitudes and lat" /udes ac
cording to the following table-
The The
fixed Their Latitude fixed Their Latitude
stars. Longitudes North. stars. Longitudes N o o r t / h . r
o ; // O 1 It 0 1 II
A b 26.41.50 12. 8.36 L 8 29.33.34 12. 7.48
B 28.40.23 11.17.54 M 29.18.54 12. 7.20
C 27.58.30 12.40.25 N 28.48.29 12.31. 9
E 26.27.17 12.52. 7 Z 29.44.48 11.57.13
F 28.28.37 11.52.22 a 29.52. 3 11.55.48
G 26.56. 8 12. 4.58 0y n 0. 8.23 11.48.56
H 27.11.45 12. 2. 1 0.40.10 1111.. 3505..4128!|
I 27.25. 2 11.53.11 1. 3.20
K 27.42. 7 i
11.53 26'!

THE SYSTEM OF THE WORLD. 513
creased, that it would describe an arc of 1, 2 , 5, 10, 100. 1000 miles before
it arrived at the earth, till at last, exceeding the limits of the earth, it
should pass quite by without touching it.
Let AFB represent the surface of the earth, C its centre, VD, VE, VF,
the curve lines which a body would describe, if projected in an horizontal
direction from the top of an high mountain successively "with more and
more velocity (p. 400) ; and, because the celestial motions are scarcely re
tarded by the little or no resistance of the spaces in which they are per
formed, to keep up the parity of cases, let us suppose either that there is
no air about the earth, or at least that it is endowed with little or no power
of resisting ; and for the same reason tl a*: the body projected with a less
velocity describes the lesser arc VD, and with a greater velocity the greater
arc VE. and, augmenting the velocity, it goes farther and farther to F and
G, if the velocity was still more and more augmented, it would reach at
last quite beyond the circumference of the earth, and return to the moun
tain from which it was projected.
And since the areas which by this motion it describes by a radius drawn
to the centre of the earth are (by Prop. 1, B ook 1, P rincip. Math.} propor
tional to the times in which they are described, its velocity, when it returns
*o the mountain, will be no less than it was at first; and, retaining the
*ame velocity, it will describe the same curve over and over, by the same law

523
THE SYSTEM OF THE WORLD.
density of the light in any place P, will, by my computation, be as the
line FG, and therefore at the centre infinite, but near the circumference
very small. And the whole light within the small circle PQ, is to the
without as the area of the quadrilateral figure CAKP to the trian-
gle PKB. And we are to understand the small circle PQ, to te there
terminated, where FG, the density of the light, begins to be less than what
is required to move the sense.
Hence it was, that, at the distance of 191 382 feet, a fire of 3 feet in di
ameter, through a telescope of 3 feet, appeared to Mr. Picart of S" in
breadth, when it should have appeared only of 3" 14'" ; and hence it is
that the brighter fixed stars appear through the telescope as of 5" or 6" in
diameter, and that with a good full light ; b ut with a fainter light they
appear to run out to a greater breadth. Hence, likewise, it was that He-
velius, by diminishing the aperture of the telescope, did cut off a great part
of the light towards the circumference, and brought the disk of the star to
be more distinctly defined, which, though hereby diminished, did yet ap
pear as of 5" or 6" in diameter. But Mr. Hvyg'etis, only by clouding the
eye-glass with a little smoke, did so effectually extinguish this scattered
light, that the fixed stars appeared as mere points, void of all sensible
breadth. Hence also it was that Mr. Huygens, from the breadth of bodies
interposed to intercept the whole light of the planets, reckoned their diam
eters greater than others hav« measured them by the micrometer : for the
534 THE SYSTEM OF THE WORLD.
the nearest quadrature in a circle whose radius is unity ; and therefore
that the square of the moon's distance from the earth is as that sum divid
ed by the horary motion of the moon. Thus it is when the variation in
the octants is in its mean quantity ; b ut if the variation is greater or less,
that versed sine must be augmented or diminished in the same ratio. Let
astronomers try how exactly the distances thus found will agree with fjie
moon's apparent diameters.
From the motions of our moon we may derive the motions of themoon*
or satellites of Jupiter and Saturn (p. 413); for the mean motion of the
nodes of the outmost satellite of Jupiter is to the mean motion of the nodes
of our moon in a proportion compounded of the duplicate proportion of
the periodic time of the earth about the sun to the periodic time of Jupiter
about the sun, and the simple proportion of the periodic time of the sat
ellite about Jupiter to the periodic time of our moon about the earth (by
Gor. XVI, Prop. LXVI) : and therefore those nodes, in the space of a hun
dred years, are carried 8° 24' backwards, or in atitecedeutia. The mean
motions of the nodes of the inner satellites are to the (mean) motion of
(the nodes of) the outmost as their periodic times to the periodic time of
this, by the same corollary, and are thence given. And the motion of the
apsis of every satellite in consequentia is to the motion of its nodes in
a/ttecedentia, as the motion of the apogee of our moon to the motion of i's
nodes (by the same Corollary), and is thence given. The greatest equa
tions of the nodes and line of the apses of each satellite are to the greatest
equations of the nodes and the line of the apses of the moon respectively
as the motion of the nodes and line of the apses of the satellites in the
time of one resolution of the first equations to the motion of the nodes
and apogeon of the moon in the time of one revolution of the last equa
tions. The variation of a satellite seen from Jupiter is to the variation
of our moon in the same proportion as the whole motions of their nodes
respectively, during the times in which the satellite and our moon (after
parting from) arc revolved (again) to the sun, by the same Corollary ; ami
therefore in the outmost satellite the variation does not exceed 5" 12 ".
From the small quantity of those inequalities, and the slowness of the
motions, it happens that the motions of the satellites are found to be so
regular, that the more modern astronomers either deny all motion to the
nodes, or affirm them to be very slowly regressive.
(P. 404). While the planets are thus revolved in orbits about remote
centres, in the mean time they make their several rotations about their
proper axes; the sun in 26 days; Jupiter in 9h. 56' ; M ars in 24f,h. ;
Venus in 23h. ; and that in planes not much inclined to the plane of the
ecliptic, and according to the order of the signs, as astronomers determine
from the spots or macula? that by turns present themselves to our sight in
their bodies; and there is a like revolution of our earth performed in 24h. ;

SEC. IX.j OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 373
there be erected the perpendiculars Aa, B6. Cc, Dd, Ee, £c.; reciprocally
proportional to the cubes of SA5 SB, SO, SD, SE, etc., the sums of the
differences, that is, t he whole angular motions will be as the corresponding
sums of the lines A#, B&, Cc, DC/, Ee, <fcc., that is (if to constitute an uni
formly fluid medium the number of the orbs be increased and their thick
ness diminished in infinitum), as the hyperbolic areas AaQ, B&Q,, CcQ,
Dtf'Q,, EeQ,, etc., analogous to the sums ; and the periodic times being re
ciprocally proportional to the angular motions, will be also reciprocally
proportional to those areas. Therefore the periodic time of any orb DIO
is reciprocally as the area Dt/Q,, that is (by the known methods of quadra
tures), directly as the square of the distance SD. Which was first to be
demonstrated.
CASE 2. From the centre of the sphere let there be drawn a great num
ber of indefinite right lines, making given angles with the axis, exceeding
one another by equal differences ; and, by these lines revolving about the
axis, conceive the orbs to be cut into innumerable annuli; then will every
annulus have four annuli contiguous to it, that is, o ne on its inside, one on
its outside, and two on each hand. Now each of these annuli cannot be
impelled equally and with contrary directions by the attrition of the inte
rior and exterior annuli, unless the motion be communicated according to
the law which we demonstrated in Case 1. This appears from that dem
onstration. And therefore any series of annuli, taken in any right line
extending itself in infinitum from the globe, will move according to the
law of Case 1, e xcept we should imagine it hindered by the attrition of the
annuli on each side of it. But now in a motion, according to this law, no
such is, and therefore cannot be, any obstacle to the motions persevering
according to that law. If annuli at equal distances from the centre
revolve either more swiftly or more slowly near the poles than near the
ecliptic, they will be accelerated if slow, and retarded if swift, by their
mutual attrition; and so the periodic times will continually approach to
equality, according to the law of Case 1. Therefore this attrition will not
at all hinder the motion from going on according to the law of Case 1 , a nd
therefore that law will take place ; t hat is, t he periodic times of the several
annuli will be as the squares of their distances from the centre of the globe.
Which was to be demonstrated in the second place.
CASE 3. Let now every annulus be divided by transverse sections into
innumerable particles constituting a substance absolutely and uniformly
fluid ; and because these sections do not at all respect the law of circular
motion, but only serve to produce a fluid substance, the law of circular mo
tion will continue the same as before. All the very small annuli will eithei
not at all change their asperity and force of mutual attrition upon account
of these sections, or else they will change the same equally. Therefore the
proportion of the causes remaining the same, the proportion of the effects

5~0 THE SYSTEM OF THE WORLD.
of eight or twelve days, and the longitude^ taken when the comet jnoves
with the greatest velocity • for thus the errors of the observation \s will
bear a less proportion to the differences of the longitudes.
LEMMA IV.
To find the longitudes of a comet to any given times.
It is done by taking in the line FG the distances Rr, Rp, proportional
to the times, and drawing the lines Tr, Tp. The way of working by
t'hgonometry is manifest.
LEMMA V.
To find the latitudes.
On TF, TR, TG, as radiuses, at right angles erect F/, RP, Gg-, tan
gents of the observed latitudes ; and parallel to fg draw PH. The per
pendiculars rp, pw, meeting PH, will be the tangents of the sought latitudes
to Tr and Tp as radiuses.
PROBLEM I.
Prow, the assumed ratio of the velocity to determine the trajectory oj a
comet.
Let S represent the sun ; / , T , r} three places of the earth in its orbit
at e^ual distances ; p , P, o5? a s many corresponding places of the comet in
its trajectory, so as the distances interposed betwixt place and place may
answer to the motion of one hour ; p r, PR, wp, perpendiculars let fall on
the plane of the ecliptic, and rRp the vestige of the trajectory in this
plane. Join S/?, SP, Sc5, SR, ST, tr, TR, rp, TP , and let tr, -p, meet in
O, TR will nearly converge to the same point O, or the error will be in
considerable. By the premised lemmas the angles rOR, ROp, are given,
as well as the ratios pr to //;, P R to TR, and wp to rp. rrlie figure £TrO

